Nessus, developed by Tenable Inc., is a widely used vulnerability scanner. It is a remote security scanning tool that performs over 1,200 checks on a target computer to identify vulnerabilities that malicious actors could exploit. It provides a range of services, including vulnerability assessments, network scans, and asset discovery, enabling security professionals to proactively mitigate risks.

3. Installation and Setup (Kali Linux)
Prerequisite: Ensure you have downloaded the Nessus Essentials package for Debian (Linux-Debian-amd64) from the Tenable website.

    Open your Linux terminal and navigate to the directory where the downloaded file is located.

    Install Nessus using the package manager command:
    sudo dpkg -i Nessus-<version_number>-debian10_amd64.deb

    Start the Nessus service to ensure it runs in the background:
    sudo systemctl start nessusd
    (Note: Ensure this service is running every time you log in to use Nessus).

    Open your web browser and navigate to the Nessus web interface:
    https://localhost:8834

    A security warning page will appear. Click on Advanced, then select Accept Risk and Continue.

    Select your preferred Nessus Product (choose Nessus Essentials for the free version).

    Enter your name and email address to receive an activation code.

    Paste the activation code into the prompt, and set up your administrator username and password. (If a password change is required later, it can be managed in the user settings).

    Allow Nessus to download and compile the necessary plugins. Once completed, the service is ready for use.

4. Step-by-Step Vulnerability Assessment Approach

Phase 1: Pre-Scan Preparations

    Target Identification: Identify the IP addresses or subnets of the critical host systems (e.g., the Metasploitable2 target machine).

    Authorization: Ensure proper authorization is documented before scanning financial institution assets.

    Service Verification: Confirm the nessusd service is actively running on the scanning machine.

Phase 2: Nessus Configurations

    Navigate to the Scans module in the Nessus web interface and click New Scan.

    Select the appropriate scan template. Use Host Discovery to map the network, followed by a Basic Network Scan or Advanced Scan for deep vulnerability probing.

    Enter the target IP address (e.g., the IP of Metasploitable2).

    Optional but recommended: Configure credentialed scans (providing SSH/SMB credentials) for maximum efficacy and deeper visibility into the local system vulnerabilities.

Phase 3: Execution (Scanning the Targets)

    Choose to run the scan On-Demand (immediately) or Schedule the scan for a specific time/day to avoid disrupting the financial institution's network traffic during peak hours.

    Launch the scan and monitor the progress bar until completion.

Phase 4: Vulnerability Analysis & Prioritization

    Once the scan finishes, click on the completed scan to view the results.

    Analyze the vulnerabilities, which Nessus categorizes by severity: Info, Low, Medium, High, and Critical.

    Prioritize remediation based on the CVSS (Common Vulnerability Scoring System) scores provided for each vulnerability. Focus immediately on Critical and High vulnerabilities that pose a direct threat to the sensitive customer data.

Phase 5: Remediation and Reporting

    Click on individual vulnerabilities to check the detailed description and the specific remediation steps recommended by Nessus.

    Generate a comprehensive report to document the findings. Click Report, select the PDF format, and choose to include the scan summary, identified vulnerabilities, severity levels, CVSS scores, and recommended mitigation actions.
